---
layout: post
title: x86-64 Assembly
categories:
- ARCHITECTURE
- ASSEMBLY
tags:
- ARCHITECTURE
- ASSEMBLY
date: 2024-06-05 20:00 +0100
description: A comprehensive guide to learn & master the art and Assembly and OS Architectures. 
image: assets/img/arch/art01.jpg
---

# Introduction
## Why Assembly At all ? 
- Rare skills are more valuable ! ($ ^^).
- Fewer people know deep system security than e.g network security.
- It's essential to reverse engineering both malicious and benign programs.
- It's essential to writing memory corruption exploits.

- Assembly knowledge is essential to digging deeper and understanding computer architecture, in order to create more secure architecture.
- New hardware security often of new assembly instructions that need to be adopted.
- Top researchers frequently show assembly as evidence of some point of their conference talks and/or whitepapers
	- To be come their peer, you must be able to speak the same language
- It's really satisfying to know how things work!

## Some Resources
- Introduction to 64 Bit Assembly Programming for Linux and OS X: Third Edition by Ray Seyfarth
- By one measure, only 14 assembly instructions account for 90% of code!" citation: "Statistical Structures: Fingerprinting Malware for Classification and Analysis", Daniel Bilar
- http://www.blackhat.com/presentations/bh-usa-06/BH-US-06-Bilar.pdf
- The x86-64 instruction frequency pi charts are from: "An Analysis of x86-64 Instruction Set for Optimization of System Softwares", Ibrahim et al.

## Miss-Alaineous
- it's called x86 because of the progress of intel chips from 8086, 80186, 80286, etc.
- Originally 16-bit architecture. Later evolved to 32 and 64-bit architecture, but kept the backwards compatibility. The hardware actually start up in 16-bit before software transitions it to 32 or 64 bit operation
- Intel originally wanted to break from x86 when moving to 64 bit. This was IA64 (Intel Architecture 64-bit) aka Itanium. However AMD decided to extend x86 to 64-bits itself, leading to the AMD64 architecture. When Itanium had very slow adoption, intel decided to bite the bullet and license the 64-bit extensions from AMD.
- In the Intel manuals you will see the 64-bit extensions referred to as IA32e or EMT64 or Intel 64 (but never IA64, again that's Itanium, a completely different architecture.)
- You might sometimes see it called amd64 or x64 by MS or some Linux distributions.
## Where is x86-64 used ?
- More powerful (but thus power-hungry) systems such as PCs, Servers, and even super-computers
	- Minimal adoption or phones ore embedded systems. Intel does have the entire Atom line of lower-power chips targeted towards embedded systems though (and they're starting to focus more on performance per Watt, which is where ARM has always been better)
## Tools can be used
- Windows Visual Studio
- Ghidra
- objdump -d
- otool -v
- IDA
- r2
- gdb
## Take Heart ! 
- By one measure, only 14 assembly instruction of 90% of code!

## Architecture - Endianness 
- Endianness comes from Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels. In which people go to war over the correct way to eat soft boiled eggs !
- Little Endian  - 0x12345678 stored in RAM "little end" first. The least significant bytes (LSB) of a word or larger is stored in the lowest address. E.g. 0x78, 0x56, 0x34, 0x12
	- Intel is Little Endian
- Big Endian is the opposite - 0x12345678 stored in ram "big end" first. The most significant byte (MSB) is stored in the lowest address. E.g. 0x12, 0x34, 0x56, 0x78
	- Network traffic is sent Big Endian (do "man byteorder" to see POSIX network-to-host ordering functions)
	- Many RISC systems (PowerPC, SPARC, MIPS, ...) started as Big Endian but can now configure as either (Bi-Endian). ARM started out little Endian and now is Bi-Endian
- Endianness applies to __memory, not registers__ ! (register always shown in bi-endian form)
- Endianness __applies to bytes, not bits__ !

## Optional Refresher
### Binary to hex to decimal
Being able to quickly convert between binary, hexadecimal, and decimal is an essential skill when reading assembly. You need to have memorized all the conversions on the below table:

Decimal (base 10)    Binary (base 2)    Hexadecimal (aka "Hex") (base 16)  
00                                      0000b                     0x00  
01                                      0001b                     0x01  
02                                      0010b                     0x02  
03                                      0011b                     0x03  
04                                      0100b                     0x04  
05                                      0101b                     0x05  
06                                      0110b                     0x06  
07                                      0111b                     0x07  
08                                      1000b                     0x08  
09                                      1001b                     0x09  
10                                      1010b                     0x0A  
11                                      1011b                     0x0B  
12                                      1100b                     0x0C  
13                                      1101b                     0x0D  
14                                      1110b                     0x0E  
15                                      1111b                     0x0F

If you haven't done a lot of this conversion in a while (or ever), you are recommended to play the following games:
- https://flippybitandtheattackofthehexadecimalsfrombase16.com/
- https://learningnetwork.cisco.com/s/binary-game

### Two's complement negative numbers
A "signed" type in C, is one which can represent either positive or negative values. An "unsigned" type is one which can only represent positive values.

Because both a signed and unsigned type have the same number of bits, this means that half the positive range must be used to represent negative numbers when data is treated as signed.

So for instance a "unsigned char" can hold the values 0-255, but a "signed char", can hold positive 0x01 to 0x7F (127), and then values 0x80 to 0xFF represent -128 to -1 respectively. Because 0x80 is binary 10000000b, and 0xFF is 11111111b, we can see that the most significant digit in all the negative numbers is always 1. So sometimes this most significant digit is referred to as the "sign bit", with 1 indicating the number is negative.

Negative values are represented as the "two's complement" of their positive value. Two's complement is computed by flipping all the bits, and adding 1.

So for instance, I said that 0xFF is -1. This can be confirmed by flipping all the bits (11111111b -> 00000000b), and then adding 1 (00000001) to yield a positive 1. Or for instance -128 is 10000000 -> 01111111 + 1 = 10000000 = 128.

The same rules for ranges which applied to one byte values can extend to 2, 4, 8, etc byte values.

2 byte positive range = 0x0001 to 0x7FFF (32767), negative range = 0x8000 (-32768) to 0xFFFF (-1)

4 byte positive range = [0x00000001, 0x7FFFFFFF], negative range = [0x80000000, 0xFFFFFFFF]

Additional reading if desired:
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signedness
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sign_bit

Happy learning and threat hunting!

Sincerely, 0xW43L ^_*
